If Lula had run for election - the Constitution prevented it -– the Brazilian people, without the shadow of a doubt, would have chosen him the winner for the third time. But Lula now leaves the scene. On Sunday, Brazil will have a new president. Most likely it will be a woman: Dilma Rousseff, the successor chosen by the president. The same president who came to the head of the State from nowhere after having been a shoe shine, without studies, with a simple title of mechanical turner and exceptional political intelligence. His successor and himself are antipodes: without his charisma, without his empathy with the poorest. She comes from an upper-middle class family of Bulgarian origin – and is much more politicized than him. And less flexible, she prefers battle over dialogue.
What will Brazil be like without Lula as of January 1, when his successor takes office? It is hard to imagine since Lula has been larger than life in his eight years in office. There is talk of a before and after when it comes to his presidency. He has been the most popular president in the country's democratic history, in which the mass of Brazilians - especially the poorest - identified him as one of them for speaking the same language, even with the same grammatical errors.
Lula achieved what seemed impossible: excite the poor, make them less poor and at the same time make the rich richer than ever and the stock market the most prosperous in the world. It provided global visibility to a country full of possibilities and saved it from the global financial crisis with its successful economic policy, both moderate and liberal.
The vast majority of Brazilians have forgiven him for everything: except, with a certain megalomania, when he comes to compare himself to Jesus Christ or boasts of never having read a book. They have forgiven him for all of his bravado, daily metamorphoses - those moments when he was able to defend in the afternoon what he had lashed out in the morning.
To get him to win the election, his favorite broke the electoral law. He forgot that he was everyone's president and became an activist for his party in his last two years. His hands were free because the opposition feared his immense popularity, a weapon that he knew how to use formidably, threatening when necessary - for example when the scandals of his government raged - to take out social movements in his favor. He literally ate the opposition and ruled as he wanted.
A Brazil without Lula may seem like an orphan Brazil. But what is really going on? The impression is that, if his favorite wins, he will have to make up with his shadow and his political cunning for the inexperience of the new president. The task will not be easy. Power has its imponderables. Could there be two presidents, like in Argentina with the Kirchners? Will Dilma allow him to let her look, as he has been accused of doing so far, like a puppet of his boss? Nobody denies the successor’s ambition, toughness of character, ability to command - the men of the Government feared her when she was minister - and a certain amount of ability to manage power. Its benefits are anyone's guess. If her term is successful, would she voluntarily let Lula return in 2014, and give up her potential second term in office? 
One thing seems certain and positive for the country's politics: without Lula, the opposition acts again, compact and strong, naked of complexities, ready to fight to achieve an alternation in power within four years, preventing Brazil from, with the hegemony of the Workers' Party dividing its power among three allied parties with surnames for rent, it could end up creating an equivalent to the Mexican PRI.
For 2014 there are already two candidates with great chances of victory, even if Lula were to run again. The first is the environmentalist Marina Silva, who, though she did not reach the second round, was the surprise candidate, obtaining 20 million votes, without television broadcasting and supported by a single minor party, the Green Party who only has 12 deputies in Congress. She represents a new way of governing that already arouses strong sympathy, especially in the young.
Along with her, Aécio Neves, the former governor of Minas Gerais, today a 50-year-old senator who, along with Lula, is a politician with the greatest popular approval, from a political family of lineage (he is the grandson of Tancredo Neves) and who has been always a politician of dialogue willing to put into practice a dream never realized: to make the two great progressive parties of the country govern together: Fernando Henrique Cardoso's PSDB and the less extremist and radical part of Lula's PT, parties always at odds until now despite presenting practically the same programs and having the same social sensitivity and concern. It would be positive for both: the PSDB accused, albeit unfairly, of elitist, of being the party of the rich and the middle class, could get closer to the popular classes; and the PT, accused of being authoritarian and hegemonic, could become more impregnated with the values of defense of democratic institutions, renouncing the Marxist temptation that the ends justify the means, which has sometimes led it to appear more corrupt than the worst of the rights.
A Brazil without Lula could be a less popular country, but perhaps more democratic, most of all, with opposition and with a more open foreign policy, considered today, according to many analysts, as excessively third world and with difficulties in dialoguing with Europe and with the United States, even with the Democrat Obama.