The Brazilian president-elect, Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, is going to promote a national pact and constitute a coalition Cabinet, as announced yesterday in his first official statement. "We are going to choose the best in Brazil to be part of a broad government that will allow us to start the rescue of secular social debts," he said. The speech was a message of tranquility for those who distrust, inside and outside, a Government of the Workers' Party (PT) and for those sectors of society that most expect from the next president.
Lula said he is willing to honor the commitments made by the outgoing government, control inflation and act with fiscal responsibility with the same firmness in which he is willing to appease hunger, create jobs, attack crime and educate the population. The first measure will be the creation of a Social Emergency Secretariat. "The hard journey that Brazil is going to face will require austerity in the use of public money and a relentless fight against corruption," he said.
Lula appeared surrounded by his wife, Marisa Letícia Lula da Silva; the elected vice president, José Alencar, of the Liberal Party (PL), and his wife, and the national president of the PT, José Dirceu. Dressed impeccably in a dark suit and red tie and flanked by a large Brazilian flag, he was introduced as 'His Excellency the President-elect'. Despite the significance of the event, the speaker did not avoid touches of irony: "You can't be that solemn," he whispered while taking a drink of water.
The new president intends to 'unite political and social forces to build a nation that benefits all of the people', and the first step will be the creation of a Council for Social and Economic Development made up of members from all walks of life, that will act as a consultative body .
With emotion, Lula interpreted his victory as "a victory for Brazilian society and democratic institutions"; the example that 'hope conquered fear', and 'the beginning of a historical cycle'. There are no miraculous solutions for "such a large and aggravated social debt in the last period," he said, and appealed for solidarity with those who have nothing to eat. "If at the end of the mandate each Brazilian can eat three times a day, I will have seen the dream of my life come true."
The new government will mobilize "public resources in state banks to stimulate the construction sector and sanitation works to create jobs," and "will do its part to overcome the crisis," said Lula. “But it is essential that international organizations reestablish credit lines. Negotiations must advance in which rich countries remove trade barriers to our products.” The PT's economic adviser, Guido Mantega, declared that the party supports granting autonomy to the Central Bank of Brazil.
Lula did not beat around the bush when criticizing the proposal for a Free Trade Agreement for the Americas, proposed by the United States. The president-elect wanted to make clear, from day one, some of his differences with Washington in the international political sphere: “Our Government will respect and try to strengthen international organizations such as the UN, and agreements such as the Kyoto Protocol and the International Criminal Court.”
For the next Brazilian president, the National Congress will have "an immense responsibility" to support the implementation of the changes he proposes. And to achieve this support, Lula is preparing to go to Parliament as many times as necessary. The new president knows that the world is closely following what he described as a "spectacular demonstration of democracy," that "what is to be done cannot be solved overnight," and that the most difficult part has now started. For this reason, he called on all sectors of society, from trade unionists to businessmen, NGOs, intellectuals and political forces to undertake "common action for our country." Lula promised to be "the president of all Brazilians."
True to his origins, Lula dedicated a memory to his comrades who are not there: "We are the bearers of their legacy and passion for justice." His last words were a message of optimism: 'My heart is pounding. I feel like a new Brazil is being born. '