President Gamal Abdel Nasser of Egypt, the most powerful leader in the Arab world, died here today after a heart attack at the age of 52, Cairo Radio announced.
Vice President Anwar Sadat, who was declared acting president, announced the death over radio and television, his voice breaking with emotion.
"Nasser was struck by a massive and severe heart attack after returning to his home and after finishing the last ceremonials of the Arab summit meeting." Sadat said in somber, sorrowful tones.
Sadat's succession was an automatic constitutional move. The National Assembly will elect a new president within 60 days, House speaker Habib Shukair said.
Egypt tonight called a state of "maximum alert" along the Suez Canal cease-fire line with Israel, the semi-official Cairo newspaper Al Ahram said. The newspaper said the action was taken to meet "any emergency", but did not elaborate.
The announcement was made at 11 p.m. (4 p.m. Washington time) that Nasser had died at 6:15 p.m. Before the word was broken, Cairo Radio carried a reading from the Koan, the Moslem holy book, for 30 minutes. The nearly five-hour delay in the announcement was not explained.
The news left Egyptians stunned and disbelieving. He had been one of the most beloved leaders in the Arab world, and people wept in capitals throughout the Middle East. Official mourning was declared throughout Egypt for 40 days.
The funeral was set for Thursday, and Soviet Prime Minister Kosygin will attend, it was announced.
President Nixon was aboard the USS Saratoga in the Mediterranean when he got word of Nasser's death. He said it was a tragic loss of an outstanding Arrab leader. He ordered cancellation of Tuesday's exercise of the U.S. 6th Fleet in the Mediterranean.
Nasser's death came at a time of great division in the Arab world he had tried to unite.
It was under Nasser's influence that Jordan's King Hussein and Arab guerrilla chief Yasser Arafat had signed a peace agreement only yesterday in Cairo to end the civil strife that had torn Jordan asunder.
Nasser's death was a blow, too, to those who placed hopes in the current cease-fire arrangements and the American peace proposals.
Only Nasser seemed strong enough to convince militant Arabs that negotiations would be advisable. He was the first party to agree to the U.S. initiative.
Sadat said Nasser died at his home on the outskirts of Cairo three hours after seeing off most of the Arab leaders who attended the Cairo summit conference on Jordan. The body was later moved to the presidential palace.
Sadat said Nasser died "while standing in the field of struggle for the unity of the Arab world."
"His memory will remain immortal in the conscience of the Arab world," the vice president said.
An announcer gave this version of how Nasser died: "... Nasser was seeing the Kuwait ruler off at the airport when he felt dizzy and began perspiring profusely."
"He was taken to his house at Manshiet el Bakry Cairo suburrb. Doctors were immediately called in. They diagnosed a severe heart attack as a result of coronary thrombosis."
"Doctors tried to relieve him. using all possible means including a heart beat regulator. But God's will was supreme and Nasser passed away..." It was three hours from Nasser's illness at the airport to his death.
He had sufferred bouts with ill health from a circulatory complaint for two years, but appeared to have recovered after treatment. 
Al Ahram said Nasser suffered a first heart attack in September of last year and it was then agreed, because of several considerations, to announce that he had an attack of influenza. He spent six weeks in bed and was advised against overwork.
From the time of the overthrow of King Farouk's corrupt monarchy in 1952, Nasser was the guiding hand behind what he called Egypt's continuing revolution.
The son of a postal cleric, he was one of the group of young officers, including Vice President Sadat, who plotted the king's overthrow and then pulled strings that manipulated the new figurehead leader, Mohammed Naguib.
When the time came for Nasser to come into the open as the claimant to the leadership of Egypt, Naguib was easily removed and the real leader of the revolution stepped into his place as president in 1956. Sadat was his co-conspiritor throughout all this.
Nasser picked Sadat last December for the role of vice president at a time when the President probably was aware of the possibilities involved in his history of heart troubles.
Sadat lacks the stature to speak with a commanding voice to the bulk of the 100 million Arabs, and he lacks the reputation Nasser enjoyed in the nonaligned third world.
Ali Sabry, a longtime close friend of Nasser and a partner in the 1952 coup, has recently been coming back into prominence after a period of disfavor and is considered by some observers another strong candidate for the presidency.
In Washington, sources said Sadat is perfectly capable of administering the country and running the army but has no charisma. It is inevitable that the emergence of a new and really effective leadership will take some time, they said, and there is a great danger that Egypt's actions, particularly in the Israel-Egypt area, will be less predictable.
The sources also said Sabry has no real popular following, and that there is no one else who is well known or has a following.