Premier Gamal Abdel Nasser, Egypt's military dictator, today became his country's civilian president. A new constitution also was ratified by an overwhelming margin.
Returns from yesterday's election, announced by the Interior Ministry, showed Nasser's vote far surpassed the 51-per-cent majortiy he needed for election.
About 94 per cent of the 5720000 registered voters went to the polls in Egypt's first secret-ballot election. With 114 of the 176 precincts reporting, Nasser had 3800242 votes.
Votes for the constitution reached 3103317.
The Ministry said Nasser got 99.7 per cent of the total vate cast, while the constitution got 97.7 per cent.
The votes against Nasser and the constitution were so few the Ministry did not bother to announce them. They will be given later.
An authoritative source said that under the new constitution, the President has the right to assume his office immediately in the name of the people, without a formal inaguaration or swearing in.
The Middle East News Agency said the present Cabinet would resign as soon as the election results are announced officially. The Cabinet includes 10 civilians and 9 officers from the Revolution Command Council, which masterminded the overthrow of King Farouk in 1952.
Nasser was expected to make his first public address as President of the Republic at a dinner Monday at the Cairo Officers' Club. The dinner will be given in his honor by General Abdel Hakim Amer, the army's commander in chief.
Nasser was expected to clarify future developments regarding the Cabinet and the formation of a National Union. The Union will be the only political party under the new constitution.
Nasser is expected to announce formal dissolution of the Revolutionary Council Monday.
Some press reports said Council members will form the executive committee of the new National Union. Since the Union will have veto power over candidates for the Assembly, the former Council members will retain most of their power.
Nasser and all other Council members except General Amer are resigning their military commissions. About 300 other officers who once formed the Free Officers Committee supporting the coup that toppled Farouk already have quit the military services to take key Goverment, newspaper and business positions.
The Cabinet's Legislative Committee has completed drafts of 54 laws to regulate state machinery under the new constitution. These include a law for impeaching a President, a new press law and provisions for state security.